Section 5: a local reproduction of the mid-range pivot rebase, and what it costs

Status

Not a fix. This is the deterministic local reproduction and the measurements
that docs/evidence/sec5-3305307d-hoodi-stall.txt said were in progress. It
reproduces, offline and in about three seconds, the exact condition that zeroes
promotion on Hoodi: a pivot rebase that lands DURING the account range phase.
No live run was started, sampled, or changed for this work, and no account-side
closure fix is proposed here.

Revision

Branch diagnose-live-heal-stall, from fb944d33 (head of
sec5-public-bootstrap-sync). Two commits, tests then this file.

What was already known, and what was wrong about it

sec5-3305307d-hoodi-stall.txt named the chain correctly:
SNAP-SYNC-COMMIT-ACCOUNT-PAGES (client.lisp 2774-2783) writes the
deferred-storage plan marker only when the range tasks are complete AND the
progress partial-root equals the state root; SNAP-SYNC-HEAL-REBASED-PROGRESS
(3453-3468) replaces partial-root with a synthetic witness over the domain
snap-rebased-range-witness-v1: whenever the state root moves; and
SNAP-SYNC-ACCOUNT-PAGE-NEXT-PROGRESS (2724-2729) retains that witness for every
later page. A rebase during the range phase therefore costs the marker
permanently for that session.

One consequence was missing from that account, and it is the larger one.

SNAP-SYNC-DEFERRED-STORAGE-SEGMENT returns (values nil nil nil nil) before it
reads anything, unless the plan marker is present (client.lisp 2035-2036). In
%SNAP-SYNC-HEAL-STATE the healer's initial stack is chosen at 5769-5779: the
`planned-storage` branch requires PLANNED-STORAGE-PRESENT-P, so with no marker
control falls through to

  (t (list (snap-sync-make-heal-work :account nil (make-byte-vector 0)
                                     root-bytes)))

That single :ACCOUNT work at the root IS the state-root walk. The missing
marker does not merely switch promotion off; it changes what the healer is
seeded with, from the plan's storage roots to the whole account trie. The same
reader gates SNAP-SYNC-RANGE-PLAN-FULLY-DURABLE-P (4925-4948) through
SNAP-SYNC-MAP-DEFERRED-STORAGE-PLAN, so the zero-TrieNodes completion in
SNAP-SYNC-FILL-STORAGE-THEN-HEAL (7068-7073) is unreachable too.

This was predicted from code in sec5-c4e9ec34-storage-plan-segments.txt,
"Carried forward" item 3, which recorded it as "read from code and unmeasured on
a rebasing run". It is measured below.

The fixture

tests/snap-tests.lisp, SNAP-TEST-MID-RANGE-REBASE-STATES and
SNAP-TEST-MID-RANGE-REBASE-ARM.

403 accounts. Accounts 401-403 own a forty-slot storage trie, which the
fixture's 350-byte limit caps into the deferred-storage plan, so the plan names
three roots and is not empty. Six accounts -- 1.5% -- then change balance, gain
code, and gain a storage slot. That moves 15 of the 553 account-trie nodes,
2.7%.

Both denominators are computed independently of snap sync, by
SNAP-TEST-ACCOUNT-TRIE-NODE-HASHES: a fresh MPT built over every account is
wholly dirty, so MPT-DIRTY-NODE-RECORDS enumerates exactly that root's nodes.
The test asserts the enumerated root equals the root the arm actually heals, so
the denominator provably belongs to the right trie.

Two arms, identical in everything except when the pivot moves. Both end by
healing the same after-root from the same two sources, and both install it in
:state-history, so neither walk is cheap because it healed less.

  control       48 range pages under the old root, THEN the rebase, then heal
  reproduction  20 of 48 range pages, rebase, 29 more pages under the new
                root, then heal

The reproduction arm is the live case. A Hoodi range download takes about two
and a half hours and a pivot expires roughly every half hour.

One-nibble publication depths keep the fixture small while exercising the same
content-addressed proof path as the four-nibble public-network setting, which is
the established idiom in this file (SNAP-STATE-HEALER-REUSES-PROVED-SUBTREES-
ACROSS-PIVOTS). Every range phase is bounded by MAX-PAGES and every page count
is asserted, so a cursor that stops advancing fails a count instead of hanging
the run.

Measurements

All numbers are from the committed tests and are reproduced exactly on repeat
runs.

                                        control    reproduction
  range pages before the rebase              48              20
  range pages after the rebase                0              29
  plan marker, old root                 present          absent
  plan marker, new root                  absent          absent
  plan works durable, old root (raw)          3               3
  plan works readable via SEGMENT             3               0
  promotedSubtrees                          218               0
  processedNodes                             28             322
  reusedNodes                                 7             328
  fetchedNodes                               21               3
  skippedSubtrees                            61             169
  :account proofs published by the range
  phase, counted at the rebase              365              63
  account-subtree dependency proofs           2               2

Denominators, same for both arms:

  account-trie nodes at the new root        553
  account-trie nodes that actually differ    15

  walked per changed node        control 1.9      reproduction 21.5
  share of the account trie
  re-walked                      control 5.1%     reproduction 58.2%

The number that sizes the defect is walked per changed node: 21.5 after a
mid-range rebase, against 1.9 without one. The rebase multiplies the
account-side walk by 11.5 on a fixture where 2.7% of the account trie moved.

Three durable storage works exist under the old root in BOTH arms
(SNAP-TEST-DURABLE-DEFERRED-STORAGE-COUNT scans the records directly). In the
reproduction arm SNAP-SYNC-DEFERRED-STORAGE-SEGMENT reports zero of them. The
work is durable and unreadable, which is the distinction the marker-gated reader
erases.

Narrowing *SNAP-SYNC-DEFERRED-STORAGE-MAX-WORKS* to 2, below the three-root plan
width, changes nothing: same marker absence, same promotion 0, same 322-node
walk. The zero is the missing marker, not the width bound 519e4c9b removed.

What the existing skipping mechanisms can and cannot cover

Only one thing lets the healer skip an account subtree: an exact :ACCOUNT
healed-subtree proof for that node hash, or a persisted account-subtree
dependency proof for it. The rules, with the condition that excludes each class:

Producers.

P1. Per-page range publication. SNAP-SYNC-COMPLETE-ACCOUNT-PAGE ->
    SNAP-SYNC-CLASSIFY-ACCOUNT-RANGE-SUBTREES -> SNAP-SYNC-BUFFER-ACCOUNT-PAGE-
    CONTENT (client.lisp 2468-2472). Candidates come from
    MPT-PROVED-RANGE-SUBTREES (foundation/trie/persistence.lisp 87-199), which
    excludes a bucket when any of these holds:

    a. bucket-inside-range-p (persistence.lisp 143-160) fails: the whole bucket
       [prefix||0..0, prefix||f..f] must lie inside THIS page's proved interval.
       A bucket straddling a page boundary yields nothing, and a bucket wider
       than a page can never be published by this path at all.
    b. (>= (length pointer-path) minimum-prefix-nibbles) fails
       (persistence.lisp 166). The node's POINTER PATH, not its coverage, must
       already be that deep. A leaf or extension that covers a depth-four bucket
       from pointer-path depth two is not publishable: `visit` falls through to
       the etypecase and a leaf recurses to nothing. Sparse regions of the
       account trie publish nothing at depth four.
    c. node-reference-hashed-p fails (persistence.lisp 167): an inlined node
       under 32 bytes has no hash for a proof to name.
    d. dirty-subtree-p fails (persistence.lisp 113-124): every descendant must
       be newly reconstructed by this page, so any clean or proof-edge node
       below disqualifies the whole bucket.
    e. SNAP-SYNC-CLASSIFY-ACCOUNT-RANGE-SUBTREES (client.lisp 2427-2439). The
       cond has no else clause. A bucket whose page-local deferred-storage list
       exceeds +SNAP-SYNC-ACCOUNT-SUBTREE-DEPENDENCIES-MAX+ = 64 (client.lisp
       216, 2431) contributes neither an :ACCOUNT proof nor a dependency proof.
       This is the 64-dependency bound named as a suspect.

P2. Range-plan promotion, SNAP-SYNC-PROMOTE-COMPLETE-RANGE-PLAN (5013-5108).
    The only producer that is not page-geometry-bound, and the only producer of
    shallow whole-bucket :ACCOUNT proofs. Excluded when:

    a. client.lisp 5033-5034: the plan marker is absent for the state root.
       Returns 0 before reading the plan. This is the mid-range-rebase failure.
    b. client.lisp 5110-5113: SNAP-SYNC-PROMOTE-COMPLETE-RANGE-PLANS iterates
       SNAP-SYNC-DEFERRED-STORAGE-PLAN-ROOTS (4875-4905), which enumerates
       MARKERS. With no marker the loop body never runs, so (a) is reached only
       by a direct call.
    c. client.lisp 5061-5077: a bucket naming any plan work that lacks BOTH
       SNAP-SYNC-STORAGE-RANGE-TASKS-COMPLETED-P and a published :STORAGE-ROOT
       closure proof is added to unsafe-buckets and excluded. Unchanged by
       519e4c9b and correct.
    d. Its references come from MPT-HASHED-SUBTREES-WITH-PREFIX-AT-DEPTH
       (persistence.lisp 201-240), which carries the same pointer-path gate at
       218, so a shallow spine yields nothing at depth four here either.

P3. The healer's own post-order sentinel, gated by SNAP-SYNC-HEALED-SUBTREE-
    PUBLICATION-CANDIDATE-P (5658-5671). It only publishes what it has already
    walked, so it can never prevent a walk.

Consumers.

C1. SNAP-SYNC-HEALED-SUBTREE-CANDIDATE-P (5629-5649). A work may consume a
    proof only when its marker-state is NIL or :INSIDE and its path length is at
    least *SNAP-SYNC-HEALED-SUBTREE-PREFIX-NIBBLES*, with one exception: a
    STORAGE root at path length zero (5646-5647). An account root, and every
    account node above the publication depth, is never a candidate. The top four
    nibbles of the account trie are always walked.
C2. client.lisp 6474-6477: skip when SNAP-SYNC-FILTERED-HEALED-SUBTREES-PRESENT
    returns 1 for that exact (hash, :ACCOUNT) pair.
C3. client.lisp 6478-6485 with SNAP-SYNC-HEAL-DEFER-DEPENDENCIES-P (3144-3164):
    skip when a dependency proof exists with 1..64 roots and
    deferred-storage-count + dependency-count <= 2048. A node with no recorded
    dependencies is not deferrable (3162 requires (plusp dependency-count)).
C4. integrate-present-work, client.lisp 6312-6324. THE ACCOUNT-SIDE HOLE. A
    durably present, unmarked, hash-addressed node is skipped only when
    (eq :storage (snap-sync-heal-work-kind work)). :ACCOUNT falls to
    (t (process-object work object)) and is expanded, because an unmarked
    account subtree may still name code or storage that is not durable.

Why live coverage was 537 and 12,151 against 65,536 depth-four buckets

The 12,151 :ACCOUNT proofs are buckets that passed every gate in P1 in some
page: whole bucket inside one page's proved interval, pointer path already four
nibbles deep, hash-addressed, wholly dirty, and zero page-local deferred storage
roots. The 537 dependency proofs are buckets that passed the same geometric
gates but carried 1..64 page-local deferred roots. P2, the producer that is not
page-geometry-bound, contributed 0 on that run, which is the measurement this
file reproduces.

The 64-dependency bound is a suspect the counts do not support as the dominant
exclusion. Only 537 buckets carried a page-local deferred root small enough to
record at all, so buckets excluded by exceeding 64 are at most a small residue
beside the roughly 52,800 buckets that produced nothing. The geometric gates
P1(a)-(d) are the larger share by elimination. Which of them dominates is NOT
established: it needs a per-bucket census of the preserved 5c8a39c0 store, which
was not run.

Tests landed

tests/snap-tests.lisp, both new, both green on this tree.

  snap-mid-range-rebase-zeroes-range-plan-promotion  (integration)
    The two-arm reproduction above, with every number in the table asserted.
    The DEFECT ASSERTION is marked in the source:
      (is (= 322 (getf reproduction :processed)))
    with the stated target that account-side closure must bring the
    reproduction arm's walk down to the control arm's order, so this equality
    and the three ratio assertions below it go red and the fix replaces 322 with
    a number near 28. The control arm's (is (= 28 ...)) is the positive control:
    it fails if the fixture ever stops being a cheap walk when promotion runs.
    The narrow-bound arm is the second positive control: it fails if the width
    bound, rather than the marker, is what zeroes promotion.

  snap-mid-range-rebase-witness-blocks-every-plan-marker-reader  (unit)
    The mechanism with no download. Sixteen page commits publish the marker;
    the same sixteen with a rebase between page two and page three do not,
    although every task completes and the witness is provably neither root.
    Then a three-root plan under a segment bound of two -- wider than the bound
    -- shows all three readers answering zero
    (SNAP-SYNC-DEFERRED-STORAGE-SEGMENT, SNAP-SYNC-DEFERRED-STORAGE-PLAN-ROOTS,
    SNAP-SYNC-PROMOTE-COMPLETE-RANGE-PLAN), and hand-writing ONLY the suppressed
    marker restores all three: a capped two-work segment with more-p true, one
    plan root, and 13 of 16 buckets promoted with the three open buckets still
    excluded. That last pair is the positive control that the zeroes are caused
    by the marker alone and not by the plan being wider than the bound.

Verification

  cl-workbench doctor --strict                                    exit 0

  warm image, by name (cl-workbench test NAME), each exit 0:
    snap-mid-range-rebase-zeroes-range-plan-promotion
    snap-mid-range-rebase-witness-blocks-every-plan-marker-reader
    snap-state-import-rebases-ranges-and-heals-the-new-pivot-root
    snap-range-plan-promotion-streams-a-plan-wider-than-its-bound
    snap-state-healer-reuses-proved-subtrees-across-pivots

  assertion positive control: the defect assertion was temporarily changed to
  (= 321 ...) and the warm run failed with
    LISP-ERROR: Assertion failed: (= 321 (GETF REPRODUCTION :PROCESSED))
  exit 1, then reverted. The harness also fails closed on an unknown test name
  (exit 1, "Unknown test"), so neither run selected zero tests.

  cl-workbench validation run cold-integration  > log 2>&1   exit 0
    ok SNAP-MID-RANGE-REBASE-ZEROES-RANGE-PLAN-PROMOTION
    575 tests passed, 9 skipped.

  cl-workbench validation run cold-unit         > log 2>&1   exit 0
    ok SNAP-MID-RANGE-REBASE-WITNESS-BLOCKS-EVERY-PLAN-MARKER-READER
    1409 tests passed, 3 skipped.

  Both logs carry no `not ok` line, no duplicate and no torn TAP line, and no
  compile warning under /workspace/src. The cold-unit result was produced twice
  on the same untouched tree and is identical both times.

  The counts add one test per layer, which is what this change contains: the
  diff adds exactly one :LAYER :UNIT deftest and one :LAYER :INTEGRATION
  deftest. Against the c4e9ec34 record in
  docs/evidence/sec5-c4e9ec34-storage-plan-segments.txt (1403 unit, 574
  integration) the integration delta is exactly +1; the unit delta also carries
  the commits between that revision and fb944d33 and is not attributable here.

  ONE COLD RUN WAS DISCARDED. The first cold-unit invocation reported "1411
  tests passed", two more than either clean run. Its log contains duplicated and
  torn TAP lines ("ok SNAPPY-COMPRESS-Rok TEST-WAIT-CONDITION-..."), because
  tests/snap-tests.lisp was edited while that run was in progress. Its number is
  not evidence of anything and is recorded here only so the discrepancy is not
  mistaken later for a flaky test. CLAUDE.md states the do-not-edit-during-a-run
  rule for src/ and the warm image; it holds for tests/ and for a cold run too.

What is NOT verified

1. The live magnitude. This fixture is a 403-account miniature at one-nibble
   publication depth. It reproduces the mechanism, the marker absence, the three
   zeroed readers and the DIRECTION and rough shape of the cost. It does not
   predict the live constant: the 3305307d sample had processedNodes 1.23M,
   frontierWorks 1.33M and promotedSubtrees 0, and nothing here models a trie
   deep enough for depth-four buckets to exist.
2. The account/storage split of processedNodes. That counter includes decoded
   inline and hash-addressed nodes of both kinds. The 553 and 15 denominators
   are account-trie only, computed separately. The storage share is small in
   this fixture but is not separated out.
3. The production multi-source path. SNAP-SYNC-IMPORT-STATE loads progress with
   task-count 1 (client.lisp 7121-7123), so this reproduction runs one
   whole-keyspace task; SNAP-SYNC-IMPORT-STATE-MULTI and the 64-task live
   geometry are not exercised, and bucket-to-page alignment differs accordingly.
4. Which of the P1 geometric gates dominates the live 52,800 unproved buckets.
   Bounded by elimination above, not measured.
5. Any fix. No account-side closure design is proposed, implemented, or
   evaluated here, by instruction; other work owns it.
6. No live run. Nothing remote was started, sampled, or modified.

Carried forward

1. The account side of closure is unchanged: C4 above, client.lisp 6312-6324.
   The reproduction now gives it a deterministic RED target.
2. sec5-c4e9ec34-storage-plan-segments.txt "Carried forward" item 3 can be
   marked measured rather than code-read: a rebase does leave the new root with
   no plan, SNAP-SYNC-DEFERRED-STORAGE-SEGMENT does return nothing, and the
   healer does take the state-root walk from then on.
3. A mid-range rebase also makes the plan marker unrecoverable for the OLD root,
   whose ranges were fully paid for. Whether a marker keyed by something other
   than the session's current state root would be sound is not analysed here.
