Section 5 SIGTERM during an active heal walk: the stop that never reached the
store close

Status

IMPLEMENTED AND VERIFIED LOCALLY (cold unit, integration and e2e; see
"Verification of record"). The blocking wait in the live stop is identified
and reproduced on a real node process in the integration suite, RED before the
change and GREEN after. Whether the live Hoodi stop now completes inside
`docker stop --time 30` is NOT established: that needs a live run (see "Not
verified").

Revision: branch sigterm-during-heal over cceee42f
(sec5-public-bootstrap-sync), which already carries the HTTP keep-alive stop
fix 6f8b80eb and the store close 6a6dbbb8.

The live observation

Hoodi, revision 75b0b7a7, node inside a snap heal walk with a frontier of
about 380k works, a ~57 GB RocksDB store, 12 GiB container, stopped with
`docker stop --time 30`:

  23:17:48.795Z  "Devnet shutdown requested; closing RPC listeners."
                 engine.rpc.http.listener.finish for 127.0.0.1:8545 (42
                 connections) and 127.0.0.1:8551 (100), several
                 engine.rpc.http.stream.finish, one peer.discovery.crawl
  ... nothing for ~30 s ...
  23:18:19.125Z  exit 137, OOMKilled=false (SIGKILL at the end of the grace)

RocksDB's LOG in that datadir has no "Shutdown complete", so the store close
was never reached. The listeners did stop (the keep-alive fix works); what ran
between listener finish and the store close did not finish in time. The
discovery crawl after the request is the discovery worker still running,
which is consistent with the joins below still being in progress.

What was established: the blocking wait

The stop sequence, by reading src/app/cli/devnet/service.lisp at cceee42f:
SIGTERM handler -> DEVNET-SHUTDOWN-REQUEST (listeners and registered sockets
closed) -> START-DEVNET-NODE-LISTENERS cleanup joins every worker in turn ->
DEVNET-CLI-RUN-SERVE-NODE cleanup runs the shutdown export -> the cache scope
closes the store. The joins, in order, each with its own bound:

  rejournal, txpool maintenance, payload improvement, dev period   unbounded
  sync coordinator                        15 s, terminate, 5 s
  dialer                                   5 s, terminate, 5 s
  each outbound peer session               5 s, terminate, 5 s
  discovery, discovery server, p2p listener, metrics, WebSocket
                                           5 s, terminate, 5 s each
  each inbound peer / WebSocket session    5 s, terminate, 5 s

The first of these that does not return by itself is the sync coordinator,
and the reason is the heal walk's stop observation:

1. %SNAP-SYNC-HEAL-STATE reads HEAL-YIELD-P only at its pass boundary and in
   the remote pipeline's pause predicate. A pass ends when it has collected
   enough MISSING work for a peer request. Over a store that already holds
   most of the trie, a walk finds almost nothing missing, so the whole walk is
   ONE pass that never reaches either place. Closing the peer sockets does not
   interrupt it either: it makes no peer request.

   Measured (warm image, arm64): a 69,905-node trie, every node present and
   marked incomplete, local read batches slowed to 50 ms (the regime of a
   57 GB store whose reads miss the block cache), HEAL-YIELD-P returning true
   from the fifth second on. The walk ignored it and ran to completion: 944
   read batches, 56.1 s. Without the slowdown the same walk is 1.3 s.

2. The coordinator's yield predicate (YIELD-FOR-STALE-TARGET-P in
   DEVNET-NODE-SNAP-IMPORT-WITH-FAILOVER) does not look at the shutdown request
   at all, and nothing else in the snap loops did.

So the sync coordinator join waits out its 15 s bound, terminates the thread,
and only then do the other joins start -- each with its own 5 s bound plus
5 s after a terminate. A dialer or discovery worker blocked in a dial or a
receive that no closeable reaches adds up to 10 s each; two of them already
exceed the remaining 15 s of the grace period. The shutdown export takes the
store guard with no bound behind all of that.

Reproduction (tests/cli-devnet-shutdown-deadline-tests.lisp)

DEVNET-STOP-DURING-A-LOCAL-HEAL-WALK-REACHES-THE-STORE-CLOSE-IN-TIME: a real
node (RocksDB store, p2p port 0 so the sync coordinator starts) inside the
kv-cache scope that closes its store; the coordinator's pass is replaced by a
real SNAP-SYNC-HEAL-STATE over that store's own fixture trie (69,905 nodes),
with every local read batch slowed to 50 ms. The stop is requested exactly as
the SIGTERM handler requests it, after the 20th read batch.

  previous tree   stop-to-return 15.95 s, stop-to-close 15.97 s; the walk
                  ran 298 more batches after the stop and was ended by the
                  coordinator join's terminate
  this change     stop-to-return 0.90 s, stop-to-close 0.93 s; no batch after
                  the stop

Both arms record exactly one "Shutdown complete" in the store's LOG (positive
control: the LOG carries this run's "RocksDB version" line).

A CLI-driven live heal was not used: a heal needs a CL-authorized pivot and a
peer serving snap/1, which the e2e harness cannot provide. The integration
test uses the shipped coordinator thread, shutdown request, join sequence,
store scope and close; only the pass body and the disk speed are the
fixture's.

What changed

1. Snap work observes a stop (src/networking/snap-sync/client.lisp).
   *SNAP-SYNC-STOP-P* is NIL or a predicate; SNAP-SYNC-CHECK-STOP unwinds with
   SNAP-SYNC-STOPPED when it is true. SNAP-SYNC-STOPPED is a CONDITION, not an
   ERROR, so the snap loops' own ERROR / SERIOUS-CONDITION boundaries (which
   retire sources and classify faults) do not catch it. It is read:
     - before every local read batch of the heal pass;
     - at the heal pass boundary, before HEAL-YIELD-P;
     - in the remote pipeline's pause predicate (assignment stops; the
       in-flight responses drain, their sockets already closed), and in the
       pipeline's refill collector (which then returns what it has instead of
       unwinding through the pipeline);
     - right after the pipeline returns, BEFORE the fetched-node flush and the
       checkpoint;
     - at the account-range commit seams (single-source and multi-source) and
       the storage-range commit seam, before their yield predicates.
   Nothing is written on the way out: no checkpoint, no flush of buffered
   nodes, no completion. Markers and checkpoints are crash-safe by design, so
   the next run resumes exactly as after a crash at that batch boundary. The
   healer's skip/closure rules, the read limiter and the batch collector's
   width logic are unchanged.

2. The coordinator binds it (src/app/cli/devnet/dialer.lisp).
   DEVNET-START-SYNC-COORDINATOR-THREAD binds *SNAP-SYNC-STOP-P* to
   DEVNET-SHUTDOWN-REQUESTED-P around its loop and treats SNAP-SYNC-STOPPED as
   a clean exit (no error callback, no error re-signalled after cleanup).

3. The joins share one deadline (src/app/cli/devnet/service.lisp, types.lisp,
   peer-manager.lisp).
   *DEVNET-SHUTDOWN-JOIN-BUDGET-SECONDS* = 12. The first join that needs it
   fixes the deadline; every later join, including the Engine listener
   thread's and every peer and WebSocket session's (DEVNET-JOIN-PEER-SESSIONS
   :DEADLINE), gets only what is left. A worker that outlasts it is
   terminated, given a fixed 0.1 s to unwind (so each stuck worker
   overruns the deadline by at most that), and then abandoned with a
   stderr line naming it ("Devnet shutdown abandoned worker <label>: ...");
   the export and the store close run regardless, and the close's own
   drain (+ROCKSDB-CLOSE-DRAIN-SECONDS+, 5 s) still waits for any caller left
   inside the handle. 12 s of joins + 5 s close drain + 2 s pool
   release stays inside the 20 s e2e budget named by
   sec5-shutdown-provenance-audit.txt, and inside the 30 s grace.

   The four previously unbounded joins (rejournal, txpool maintenance,
   payload improvement, dev period) are now bounded by the same deadline.

   JOIN-THREAD's outcome is read from its second value (:TIMEOUT / :ABORT);
   the old :DEFAULT :TIMEOUT sentinel was also what a terminated thread
   returns. An expired deadline polls with a 1 ms timeout: SBCL 2.2.9's
   JOIN-THREAD rejects :TIMEOUT 0 with a TYPE-ERROR.

   The SIGTERM handler is unchanged: it still does nothing but request
   shutdown.

Measurements (warm dev image, arm64, this machine)

  local heal walk, 69,905 nodes, 50 ms per read batch, HEAL-YIELD-P true
    after 5 s, previous tree                      56.1 s, 944 batches, yield
                                                  never observed
  reproduction, stop -> node returned             15.95 s -> 0.90 s
  reproduction, stop -> store closed              15.97 s -> 0.93 s
  node with two workers that ignore stop AND terminate (dialer, discovery),
    stop -> node returned                         20.96 s (previous
                                                  service.lisp) -> 3.01 s
                                                  (budget set to 3 s)

RED controls

- DEVNET-STOP-DURING-A-LOCAL-HEAL-WALK-REACHES-THE-STORE-CLOSE-IN-TIME, run in
  the warm image on cceee42f's client.lisp and dialer.lisp: fails at
  (< STOP-TO-RETURN 5d0) with 15.95 s. Its positive controls: the stop landed
  after at least 20 batches, fewer than 400 of the 944 batches ran (the walk
  was really interrupted mid-way), and the LOG carries the run's version line.
- DEVNET-STUCK-WORKERS-DO-NOT-KEEP-THE-NODE-FROM-ITS-STORE-CLOSE, run with
  cceee42f's service.lisp loaded over the new tree: fails at
  (< STOP-TO-RETURN 5d0) with 20.96 s and no "abandoned" line. The stuck
  workers hold WITHOUT-INTERRUPTS, which defers TERMINATE-THREAD exactly as a
  foreign call does.
- DEVNET-SHUTDOWN-JOINS-SHARE-ONE-DEADLINE (unit) carries the per-join shape
  inline as its positive control: the same two stuck workers joined with a
  1 s budget EACH take >= 2 s; under one shared 1 s deadline they take
  between 1.0 and 1.5 s. It also exercises :ABSENT, :JOINED and :TERMINATED so
  that :ABANDONED is not the only answer the helper can give.

Verification of record

At 4ed38c80 (code), cold images, this machine, 2026-09-23:

cl-workbench validation run cold-unit
  1428 tests passed, 3 skipped.   Exit 0.   (1431 selected = 1431 registered
  for :unit; one unit test added)
cl-workbench validation run cold-integration
  597 tests passed, 9 skipped.    Exit 0.   (606 selected = 606 registered;
  two integration tests added)
cl-workbench validation run cold-e2e
  worker 1: 33 tests passed; worker 2: 36 tests passed.   Exit 0.
  (69 = 69 registered; none added)

Registered counts were read from the warm image's test registry with the new
file loaded; cceee42f therefore registers 1430 unit and 604 integration tests.
Each new test is "ok" by name in its log, as are
DEVNET-KV-CACHE-CLOSES-THE-NODE-STORE-ONCE-AFTER-ITS-WORKERS-STOP,
DEVNET-CLI-NODE-CLOSES-ITS-ROCKSDB-STORE-ON-EVERY-EXIT-PATH and both
DEVNET-CLI-SIGTERM-STOPS-A-NODE-... keep-alive tests. No "not ok", and no
compile warning under /workspace/src, in any of the three logs.

An earlier cold-unit at 15aba19b failed one check: the :TERMINATED arm of
DEVNET-SHUTDOWN-JOINS-SHARE-ONE-DEADLINE. The post-terminate join then waited
only what was left of the deadline, which is nothing once the first join has
timed out at it, so a worker that would unwind in milliseconds was reported
abandoned. 4ed38c80 gives it a fixed 0.1 s grace; the cold-integration and
cold-e2e runs at 15aba19b were green (597 passed, 9 skipped; 33 + 36).


Not verified

- The live stop. Owed: a Hoodi run on this revision stopped with the gate's
  `docker stop --time 30` while a heal walk is active, with the exit status,
  the time from "Devnet shutdown requested" to exit, any "abandoned worker"
  line, and "Shutdown complete" in chaindata/LOG.
- The live batch latency. The reproduction's 50 ms per read batch is a model
  of a cold 57 GB store; the live per-batch time was not measured. The stop is
  observed once per batch, so a single batch far slower than a second would
  show up directly in stop-to-return.
- The shutdown export is still unbounded: it takes the node store guard with
  no timeout. A worker abandoned while holding that guard (it would have to be
  stuck in a foreign call, since a terminated thread releases the mutex on
  unwind) would block the export and hence the close. Not reproduced; not
  changed here.
- The range and storage-range stop checks are exercised by no dedicated test;
  they sit at the same seams as the existing yield checks and unwind the same
  way. The pipeline's pause-and-drain path on a stop is exercised by no
  dedicated test either; the reproduction covers the local walk.
- The pipeline and range event loops still join their own request workers
  without a bound when they unwind; that relies on the shutdown request having
  closed the peer sockets those workers wait on.
- E4 from the memory-fault trace (the SIGTERM handler takes a mutex and runs
  closeable thunks in signal context) is unchanged.
